TAP for TUF developer key management (#141)
theupdateframework/taps: candidate-fulcio-tap.md

This TAP proposes a way for developers to use their existing OpenID Connect (OIDC) accounts – such as an email account – to verify their identity, so that they do not have to manage any additional keys or passwords.

# Rationale
In a previous draft of [PEP 480](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/), the authors proposed using [MiniLock](https://www.minilock.io) - a tool which derives ed25519 keys from a user-chosen passphrase - to simplify developer key management. However, this requires developers to remember a new and additional passphrase for use when uploading packages. Furthermore, the MiniLock project is [no longer maintained](https://github.com/kaepora/miniLock).

> In this TAP, we instead propose use of the sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides two services, [Fulcio](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio) (a WebPKI) and [Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) (a transparency log). With sigstore, short-lived keys do not need to be secured as they are only valid for a small window of time. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this TAP, we instead propose use of the sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides two services, [Fulcio](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio) (a WebPKI) and [Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) (a transparency log). With sigstore, long-term efforts to keep private keys secure are not necessary, as short-lived keys are only valid for a small window of time. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.
```

> In this TAP, we instead propose use of the sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides two services, [Fulcio](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio) (a WebPKI) and [Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) (a transparency log). With sigstore, long-term efforts to keep private keys secure are not necessary, as short-lived keys are only valid for a small window of time. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.

Reviewer 2: By using OIDC, does this mean we need to communicate with the server in order to verify they’re properly signed? That seems fine for certain use cases, but I believe this means we can’t use this key type for a client metadata backstop if we land #128.

Author: Yes, that is one of the tradeoffs of this TAP. The cert can be verified to a defined Fulcio server locally (described in the verification section), but the transparency log checks require internet access.

Author: The downside would be that any updates (especially revocations) would be missing from the local copy. This could certainly be a good workaround for some use cases though.

Reviewer: Turns out, there's a better answer, from the recently published [Busting 5 Sigstore Myths](https://chainguard.dev/posts/2021-11-19-sigstore-myths):
> #### Myth #4: The transparency log means you can’t verify signatures offline.
> We use what’s called "stapled inclusion proofs” by default, meaning you can verify an object is present in the transparency log without needing to contact the transparency log! The signer is responsible for gathering this evidence from the log and presenting it alongside the artifact and signature. We store this in an OCI image automatically, but you can treat it like a normal file and copy it around for verification as well.

Author: Thanks @axelsimon for adding this to the text below.

# Specification
In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace ed25519 keys for developers in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing certificates backed by OIDC authentication of a developer’s email address. Because the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting this key in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an email address and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. So, this TAP adds a “sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  “keytype”: “sigstore-oidc",
  “scheme”: SERVER,
  “keyval”: {

>     “email”: EMAIL,

Reviewer: Dan mentions in his blog post [Using The Update Framework in Sigstore](https://dlorenc.medium.com/using-the-update-framework-in-sigstore-dc393cfe6b52) "email or SPIFFE-based" when mentioning the OIDC identities that can be used with Fulcio. Should this TAP be amended to reflect that? Are SPIFFE-based IDs something we want to consider in the context of this TAP?

Author: For simplicity, I'd rather not mention SPIFFE directly in the TUF spec, but I can change this to something more generic like 'OIDC identity' with email used as an example, so that implementations that also use SPIFFE can use this field, without us having to define that here.

Reviewer: I see your point, mentioning SPIFFE would likely complicate things for no good reason. Thanks for the change.

    “issuer”: ISSUER
  }
}
```

> Where SERVER is the Fulcio server used to generate the certificate, EMAIL is the identity of the party who is authorized to sign, and ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification. The client MUST establish trust in the Fulcio server using a trusted channel before using it for verification (see Verification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where SERVER is the Fulcio server used to generate the certificate, EMAIL is the identity of the party who is authorized to sign, and ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification. The client MUST establish trust in the Fulcio server using a trusted channel before using it for verification (see Verification).
```

> Using this mechanism, the developer requests a certificate from Fulcio, verifies their identity using OIDC, uses the certificate to sign their targets metadata, and uploads the signed metadata. This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by the repository and MAY be verified by the end user by verifying the certificate through Fulcio and the timestamp through Rekor. The verifier MUST obtain the Fulcio root key using a secure offline method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this mechanism, the developer requests a certificate from Fulcio, verifies their identity using OIDC, uses the certificate to sign their targets metadata, and uploads the signed metadata. This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by the repository and MAY be verified by the end user by verifying the certificate through Fulcio and the timestamp through Rekor. The verifier MUST obtain the Fulcio root key using a secure offline method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.
```

May be worth being specific here.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key should include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a ‘cert’ field to ‘signatures’. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
"signatures" : [
    { "keyid" : KEYID,
      "sig" : SIGNATURE,
      “cert”:  CERTIFICATE }
      , ... ]
```

> Where CERTIFICATE is a Fulcio signing certificate in PEM format. CERTIFICATE MUST be uploaded to a timestamped transparency log upon creation.

Reviewer 3: Does the CERTIFICATE include the timestamped signature? Not clear from here.

Author: it's an x509 cert, so it is signed and has a `notbefore` and `notAfter`. I can't find any Fulcio specific documentation, other than [the code](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/blob/b37c46c767e60714a13b8bddee0e00522a7a10a2/pkg/ca/fulcioca/fulcioca.go#L31)

## Signing
In order to sign metadata using Fulcio, a developer would:
* Generate a key pair locally
* Initiate an OIDC session to Fulcio to retrieve their email from a OIDC provider
* Perform a challenge by encrypting their email with the public key
* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a timestamped transparency log
* Use this certificate to sign targets metadata, then include the certificate in ‘signatures’ as indicated above
* Upload the metadata to the repository

The repository would:
* automatically perform verification (see below) with Fulcio and the transparency log to ensure that the certificate is current and valid.

> Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers and minimise the risk of human errors.
```

## Verification
While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST verify the certificate chain up to SERVER. Additionally, they must ensure that SERVER is a known, trusted Fulcio root. The trusted Fulcio root MUST be communicated to the client using a secure channel before the update process, such as metadata signed by an offline root key or during initial client configuration.

In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used.

## Auditors

> Developers should monitor the TL for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the developer should replace any compromised metadata, and report the compromise to the maintainers of the Fulcio server and any targets metadata owners who delegate to the compromised account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers should monitor the transparency log (TL) for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the developer should replace any compromised metadata, and report the compromise to the maintainers of the Fulcio server and any targets metadata owners who delegate to the compromised account.
```

> In addition to developer monitoring, the TL should have auditors that watch the log for any suspicious activity. If something bad is found in the TL, then auditors must indicate this to clients to ensure they don’t use bad certificates. Clients SHOULD have a way to ensure that the transparency log has been audited. For example, auditors may upload signed targets metadata to the repository upon valid completion of an audit. Clients can look for the auditor signature on targets metadata before verifying any Fulcio-signed delegated targets. The auditor only signs metadata if all signatures in the TL look good. If the auditor detects a problem, they may revoke the auditor-signed metadata.

Reviewer 3: Should make clear you mean threshold signatures involving both developers and auditors. This requires [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md).

Reviewer: Same question here, "then auditors MUST indicate this to clients"?

```suggestion
In addition to developer monitoring, the TL should have auditors that watch the log for any suspicious activity. If something bad is found in the TL, then auditors must indicate this to clients to ensure they don’t use bad certificates. Clients SHOULD have a way to ensure that the transparency log has been audited. For example, auditors may upload signed targets metadata to the repository upon valid completion of an audit. Clients can look for the auditor signature on targets metadata, in addition to the developer signature, before verifying any Fulcio-signed delegated targets. In practice, this means using threshold signature of both developers and auditors, which in turn requires [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md). The auditor MUST only sign metadata if all signatures in the TL look good. If the auditor detects a problem, they MAY revoke the auditor-signed metadata.
```

An attempt at incorporating the points @trishankatdatadog was making.

If the bad certificates are due to a compromised Fulcio server, the Fulcio server SHOULD be revoked using the root of trust.

> # Security Analysis

Reviewer 3: Missing what a developer does when the developer is compromised, and an "authentic" but unauthorized signature is issued.

Reviewer: I think this is now covered by the section L93 ("If a developer's OIDC credentials are compromised, the developer should use existing TUF processes for revocation").

Author: yes, I added that line, but didn't resolve this conversation. I'll do so now unless @trishankatdatadog objects.

This TAP improves security by eliminating the risk of developers losing their keys if they chose to use Fulcio instead of a traditional public key cryptosystem. However, it adds 2 additional services that may be compromised: the Fulcio server and the transparency log. In this section, we will analyse the impact and recovery in each of these cases.

If the Fulcio server is compromised, it may issue certificates on behalf of any developer who uses Fulcio to verify their identity. However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any server compromise. Additionally, all Fulcio certificates are published to a transparency log, so auditors will notice if the Fulcio server is misbehaving and indicate this to users, for example through the use of auditor-signed metadata.

> If only the transparency log is compromised, the attacker will not be able to do anything without cooperation from the Fulcio server. However, if the attacker compromises both the Fulcio server and the transparency log, they would be able to issue fake Fulcio certificates that also appear valid on the transparency log. If this happens, developers auditing the transparency log would notice the mis-issued certificates, and the Fulcio server and transparency log could both be recovered using offline root keys.

Reviewer: This might be a nitpick, or just show my lack of understanding, but would it be more precise to say that it is the **trust in the** Fulcio server and transparency log that could be recovered? I expect the servers would need to be scrapped and reinstalled and data restored from a last known good backup. Is this correct?

Author: Using Sigstore's TUF root keys, we can replace the Fulcio or Rekor signing keys. The transparency log may need to be scrapped if malicious content was added, but Fulcio should be able to recover without scrapping the server.

cc @trishankatdatadog @asraa

Reviewer: I guess what's driving my thought is this idea that once a server has been compromised, you just can't be sure you've recovered it  cleaned it up fully and you should just redeploy it. But given Fulcio and Rekor are cloud-native, that way of thinking is a bit moot: the Fulcio and Rekor containers are just redeployed on a regular basis anyway, and then it's just a question of trusting the data. So yeah, maybe an issue for Rekor, but less one for Fulcio. Maybe it's the wording "server" that still makes me think following the non cloud-native paradigm.Thanks!

# Backwards Compatibility

Clients that do not recognize Fulcio certs will not be able to validate signatures from Fulcio certs, but they will be able to parse the metadata.

‘Cert’ is a new field added to ‘signatures’. Clients that do not recognize Fulcio certs will ignore this field by default.

# Augmented Reference Implementation

> TODO

Reviewer: @mnm678 Is this a blocker for merging? :)

Author: No, we'll need this before the TAP moves from draft to accepted, but it shouldn't be a blocker for merging the draft. And I think @asraa has some initial work in go-tuf that I can link here anyway.

Reviewer: Ok, nice to hear! Thanks @mnm678.

* TAP:

> * Title: Fulcio for TUF developer key management

Reviewer: I have a feeling we want to make the title a bit more explanatory, as "Fulcio" is not (yet) a household name.
Maybe something like "Ephemereal identity verification using Sigstore Fulcio for TUF developer key management". That's long and clunky, but gives an idea.

* Version: 0
* Last-Modified: 27/07/2021
* Author: Marina Moore, Joshua Lock, Asra Ali, Luke Hinds, Jussi Kukkonen, Trishank Kuppusamy, axel simon
* Type: Standardization
* Status: Draft
* Content-Type: markdown
* Created: 27/07/2021
* +TUF-Version:
* +Post-History:

# Abstract

> In order to achieve end-to-end software update security, TUF requires developers to sign updates with a private key. However, this has proven challenging for some implementers as developers then have to create, store, and secure these private keys in order to ensure they remain private. This TAP proposes using Sigstore’s Fulcio project to simplify developer key management by allowing developers to use existing accounts to verify their identity when signing updates. Targets roles may delegate to Fulcio identities instead of private keys, and these identities, and the corresponding certificates can be used for verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to achieve end-to-end software update security, TUF requires developers to sign updates with a private key. However, this has proven challenging for some implementers as developers then have to create, store, and secure these private keys in order to ensure they remain private. This TAP proposes using Sigstore’s Fulcio project to simplify developer key management by allowing developers to use existing accounts to verify their identity when signing updates. A TUF targets roles may delegate to Fulcio identities instead of private keys, and these identities, and the corresponding certificates can be used for verification.
```

# Motivation
Developer key management has been a major concern for TUF adoptions, especially for projects with a small number of developers or limited resources. TUF currently requires that every targets metadata signer creates and manages a private key. However, many developers in large TUF adoptions, including PyPI, do not want the extra burden of protecting a private key for use in deployment.

> Protecting a private key from loss or compromise is no simple matter. [Several](https://blog.npmjs.org/post/185397814280/plot-to-steal-cryptocurrency-foiled-by-the-npm) [attacks](https://jsoverson.medium.com/how-two-malicious-npm-packages-targeted-sabotaged-one-other-fed7199099c8) on software update systems have been achieved through the use of a compromised key, as securing private keys can be challenging and sometimes expensive (yubikeys etc).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protecting a private key from loss or compromise is no simple matter. [Several](https://blog.npmjs.org/post/185397814280/plot-to-steal-cryptocurrency-foiled-by-the-npm) [attacks](https://jsoverson.medium.com/how-two-malicious-npm-packages-targeted-sabotaged-one-other-fed7199099c8) on software update systems have been achieved through the use of a compromised key, as securing private keys can be challenging, and sometimes expensive (using hardware keys such Yubikeys etc)., especially over a period of time.
```

This TAP proposes a way for developers to use their existing OpenID Connect (OIDC) accounts – such as an email account – to verify their identity, so that they do not have to manage any additional keys or passwords.

# Rationale

> In a previous draft of [PEP 480](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/), the authors proposed using [MiniLock](https://www.minilock.io) - a tool which derives ed25519 keys from a user-chosen passphrase –  to simplify developer key management. However, this requires developers to remember a new and additional passphrase for use when uploading packages. Furthermore, the MiniLock project is no longer maintained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a previous draft of [PEP 480](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0480/), the authors proposed using [MiniLock](https://www.minilock.io) – a tool which derives ed25519 keys from a user-chosen passphrase –  to simplify developer key management. However, this requires developers to remember a new and additional passphrase for use when uploading packages. Furthermore, the MiniLock project is [no longer maintained](https://github.com/kaepora/miniLock).
```
En-dash for consistency with previous paragraph. Link on Minilock to let the user see for themselves what we are saying.

> In this TAP, we instead propose use of the Sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides two services, Fuclio (a WebPKI) and Rekor (a transparency log). With sigstore, short-lived keys do not need to be secured as they are only valid for a small window. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this TAP, we instead propose use of the sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides two services, [Fulcio](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio) (a WebPKI) and [Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) (a transparency log). With sigstore, short-lived keys do not need to be secured as they are only valid for a small window of time. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.
```

* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a timestamped transparency log
* Use this certificate to sign targets metadata, then include the certificate in ‘signatures’ as indicated above
* Upload the metadata to the repository

The repository would:
* automatically perform verification (see below) with Fulcio and the transparency log to ensure that the certificate is current and valid.

Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers and minimise the risk of human errors.

## Verification
While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST verify the certificate chain up to SERVER. Additionally, they MUST ensure that SERVER is a known, trusted Fulcio root. The trusted Fulcio root MUST be communicated to the client using a secure channel before the update process, such as metadata signed by an offline root key or during initial client configuration.

> In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used. This may be done by directly querying the transparency log or, in cases where online verification is not possible, via the use of stapled inclusion proofs, evidence gathered by the signer from the log and presented alongside the software and signature.
```

> In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used. This may be done by directly querying the transparency log or, in cases where online verification is not possible, via the use of stapled inclusion proofs, evidence gathered by the signer from the log and presented alongside the software and signature.

Reviewer 4: Should you also need to mention an out of band process is needed distribute the verification material for verifying an offline proof?

## Auditors

> Developers should monitor the transparency log (TL) for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the developer should replace any compromised metadata, and report the compromise to the maintainers of the Fulcio server and any targets metadata owners who delegate to the compromised account.

Reviewer: Do we want a SHOULD here ("Developers SHOULD monitor the transparency log") or is this a softer suggestion?

Author: Good catch, I updated this here and elsewhere in the TAP.

> Developers SHOULD monitor the transparency log (TL) for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the developer SHOULD replace any compromised metadata, and report the compromise to the maintainers of the Fulcio server and any targets metadata owners who delegate to the compromised account.

Reviewer 4: I’m not sure what benefit there is to reporting this to Fulcio maintainers. There is currently no support for redaction of the CT log, and nothing to delete since certificates aren’t persisted.

Reviewer 3: Good point. Maybe we should think about adding ways for clients to discover compromised Fulcio keys (and corresponding compromised TUF targets signed by those keys).

Reviewer 4: Would we want this to be managed, either by Fulcio, an ecosystem, or an individual developer? For the first two, there's a question of authentication. For the latter, there's a question for discovery.

Reviewer 3: I have no idea yet. I feel like it's an important practical issue all Fulcio users must eventually deal with.

Author: Good point. I removed this and clarified that replacing the signature will make a new valid Fulcio cert

In addition to developer monitoring, the TL should have auditors that watch the log for any suspicious activity. If something bad is found in the TL, then auditors must indicate this to clients to ensure they don’t use bad certificates. Clients SHOULD have a way to ensure that the transparency log has been audited. For example, auditors may upload signed targets metadata to the repository upon valid completion of an audit. Clients can look for the auditor signature on targets metadata before verifying any Fulcio-signed delegated targets. The auditor only signs metadata if all signatures in the TL look good. If the auditor detects a problem, they may revoke the auditor-signed metadata.

> If the bad certificates are due to a compromised Fulcio server, the Fulcio server SHOULD be revoked using the root of trust.

Reviewer: Maybe nitpicking, but why SHOULD and not MUST here?

# Security Analysis

> This TAP improves security by eliminating the risk of developers losing their keys if they chose to use Fulcio instead of a traditional public key cryptosystem. However, it adds 2 additional services that may be compromised: the Fulcio server and the transparency log. In this section, we will analyze the impact and recovery in each of these cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This TAP improves security by eliminating the risk of developers losing their keys if they chose to use Fulcio instead of a traditional public key cryptosystem. However, it adds 2 additional services that may be compromised: the Fulcio server and the Rekor transparency log. In this section, we will analyze the impact and recovery in each of these cases.
```

If a developer's OIDC credentials are compromised, the developer should use existing TUF processes for revocation. Specifically they should ask the delegator to replace any metadata that includes the compromised OIDC account.

> If the Fulcio server is compromised, it may issue certificates on behalf of any developer who uses Fulcio to verify their identity. However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any server compromise. Additionally, all Fulcio certificates are published to a transparency log, so auditors will notice if the Fulcio server is misbehaving and indicate this to users, for example through the use of [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md) to a threshold of both auditor-signed metadata and developer-signed metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Fulcio server is compromised, it may issue certificates on behalf of any attacker who uses Fulcio to verify their identity. However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any Fulcio server compromise. Additionally, all Fulcio certificates are published to a transparency log, so auditors will notice if the Fulcio server is misbehaving and indicate this to users, for example through the use of [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md) to a threshold of both auditor-signed metadata and developer-signed metadata.
```
Let's state clearly that "any developer" in this case really means an attacker, do you agree @mnm678?

# Specification
In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace public keys for developers (such as ed25519 keys) in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing certificates backed by OIDC authentication of a developer’s email address. Because the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting this key in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an OIDC identity, such as an email address, and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. To do so, this TAP adds a “sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  “keytype”: “sigstore-oidc",
  “scheme”: "Fulcio",
  “keyval”: {
    “identity”: IDENTITY,
    “issuer”: ISSUER,

>     "root-cert": ROOT_CERTIFICATE

Author: Not all TUF clients will verify using Rekor, so including the root certificate here means that clients don't have to make network calls outside the usual TUF process. TUF allows for revocation, etc of anything in the metadata, including this field, and so listing the root cert here limits the impact of a compromised Fulcio server.

>     "root-cert": ROOT_CERTIFICATE

Reviewer 5: @haydentherapper you are probably right that this is too much detail... I believe the point here was that we need to identify the sigstore instance somehow, right? How does the TUF client know it should use the sigstore.dev services?

  }
}
```

Where IDENTITY is the OIDC identity of the party who is authorized to sign, ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification, and ROOT_CERTIFICATE is the root certificate for this Fulcio server.

Using this mechanism, the developer requests a certificate from Fulcio, verifies their identity using OIDC, uses the certificate to sign their targets metadata, and uploads the signed metadata. This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by the repository and MAY be verified by the end user by verifying the certificate through Fulcio and the timestamp through Rekor. The verifier MUST obtain the Rekor root keys using a secure offline method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key MUST include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a ‘cert’ field to ‘signatures’. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
"signatures" : [

>     { "keyid" : KEYID,

Author: Yes and no, the keyid is used by TUF as a "hint" so that the verifier can determine which signing key/identity is trusted to sign a particular piece of metadata. So it's needed for interaction with other parts of TUF.

## Signing
In order to sign metadata using Fulcio, a developer would:
* Generate a key pair locally
* Initiate an OIDC session to Fulcio to retrieve their email from a OIDC provider
* Perform a challenge by encrypting their email with the public key
* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a timestamped transparency log
* Use this certificate to sign targets metadata, then include the certificate in ‘signatures’ as indicated above
* Upload the metadata to the repository

The repository would:
* automatically perform verification (see below) with Fulcio and the transparency log to ensure that the certificate is current and valid.

Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers and minimise the risk of human errors.

## Verification
While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST verify the certificate chain up to ROOT_CERTIFICATE.

> In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the Rekor transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used. To do the user can directly querying the transparency log for the Fulcio certificate. They can then verify that the certificate was uploaded to the Rekor, and use the timestamp in Rekor to verify that the key was valid at the time it was used to sign TUF metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, the repository MUST, and clients SHOULD additionally query the Rekor transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was used. To do the user can directly query the transparency log for the Fulcio certificate. They can then verify that the certificate was uploaded to the Rekor, and use the timestamp in Rekor to verify that the key was valid at the time it was used to sign TUF metadata.
```

> In cases where online verification is not possible, stapled inclusion proofs, evidence gathered by the signer from the log, may be presented alongside the software and signature. The user may use these proofs instead of directly querying Rekor's transparecy log. Verification material for these stapled inclusion proofs MUST be distributed out of band alongside the Rekor root. Documentation about querying Rekor is available [here](https://docs.sigstore.dev/rekor/CLI).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In cases where online verification is not possible, stapled inclusion proofs (i.e., evidence gathered by the signer from the log) MAY be presented alongside the software and signature. The user MAY use these proofs instead of directly querying Rekor's transparecy log. Verification material for these stapled inclusion proofs MUST be distributed out of band alongside the Rekor root. Documentation about querying Rekor is available [here](https://docs.sigstore.dev/rekor/CLI).
```

> In addition, the repository SHOULD, and clients MAY additionally query the Rekor transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was issued. To do so the user can directly query the transparency log for the Fulcio certificate. They can then verify that the certificate was uploaded to the Rekor, and use the timestamp in Rekor to verify that the key was valid at the time it was used to sign TUF metadata. The repository SHOULD skip this step if the Fulcio certificate was valid at the time it was uploaded to the repository. Clients MAY skip this step if they would like to rely on the repository to perform the timeliness check. If the client skips this check and the repository is compromised, an attacker could allow the use of expired Fulcio certificates.

Reviewer 4: I think this step should be a MUST for a couple of reasons:

1) It guarantees that the issued certificate was valid when the signature was generated. It's unlikely that clients will verify signatures at the time when the certificate is still valid, so I'd rather just always require querying.
2) It guarantees that the certificate is in the log, and so we know that it is auditable.

Author: This was required at first, but @jku convinced me that the main goal of checking Rekor is to ensure timeliness, which is not needed if the metadata is uploaded within the validity window of the Fulcio certificate.

Reviewer 4: Yea, it makes sense that Rekor not be a requirement since this TAP is not about artifact signing. Maybe we can get the best of both worlds, and still not require Rekor. I mentioned that Fulcio publishes its certificates to its own certificate transparency log. What about mandating that the certificate was uploaded to a CT log when the certificate was valid?

> In cases where online verification is not possible, stapled inclusion proofs (i.e., evidence gathered by the signer from the log) MAY be presented alongside the software and signature. The client MAY use these proofs instead of directly querying Rekor's transparecy log. Verification material for these stapled inclusion proofs MUST be distributed out of band alongside the Rekor root. Documentation about querying Rekor is available [here](https://docs.sigstore.dev/rekor/CLI).

Reviewer 4: Can this be relaxed to support the offline "SET bundles" of the signed timestamp and entry? Those don't include inclusion proofs, they're more like promises of inclusion, but they are signed by the log signer (same signer as what signed the tree heads), and so the trust model is the same.

## Auditors
Developers SHOULD monitor the transparency log (TL) for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the developer SHOULD replace any compromised metadata (creating new Fulcio certificate), and ensure the security of their OIDC account. If the OIDC account cannot be recovered, the developer MUST contact the role that delegates to them to replace the delegation to their OIDC identity.

> In addition to developer monitoring, the TL SHOULD have auditors that watch the log for any suspicious activity. If something bad is found in the TL, then auditors MUST indicate this to clients to ensure they don’t use bad certificates. Clients SHOULD have a way to ensure that the transparency log has been audited. For example, auditors may upload signed targets metadata to the repository upon valid completion of an audit. Clients can look for the auditor signature on targets metadata using multi-role delegations before verifying any Fulcio-signed delegated targets. The auditor MUST only sign metadata if all signatures in the TL look good. If the auditor detects a problem, they SHOULD revoke the auditor-signed metadata.

Reviewer 4: > something bad

Can we specify what we mean by bad? Things like "the log was found to be mutated, the log was not operating as append-only, the log provided invalid inclusion proofs"?

> In addition to developer monitoring, the TL SHOULD have auditors that watch the log for any suspicious activity. If something bad is found in the TL, then auditors MUST indicate this to clients to ensure they don’t use bad certificates. Clients SHOULD have a way to ensure that the transparency log has been audited. For example, auditors may upload signed targets metadata to the repository upon valid completion of an audit. Clients can look for the auditor signature on targets metadata using multi-role delegations before verifying any Fulcio-signed delegated targets. The auditor MUST only sign metadata if all signatures in the TL look good. If the auditor detects a problem, they SHOULD revoke the auditor-signed metadata.

Reviewer 4: Do we have a format for the multi-role delegations and how to include an auditor signature? Do we have more details on how an auditor would revoke their signature?

> If the bad certificates are due to a compromised Fulcio server, the Fulcio server MUST be revoked using the root of trust.

Reviewer 4: > the Fulcio server MUST be revoked using the root of trust.

nit, suggest rephrasing: "Fulcio must revoke its certificate, distribute a new certificate in the TUF Sigstore root of trust, and inform clients of the compromise"

# Security Analysis

> This TAP improves security by eliminating the risk of developers losing their keys if they chose to use Fulcio instead of a traditional public key cryptosystem. However, it adds 2 additional services that may be compromised: the Fulcio server and the Rekor transparency log. In this section, we will analyze the impact and recovery in each of these cases.

Reviewer 4: 3 services, also the identity provider

> If a developer's OIDC credentials are compromised, the developer SHOULD use existing TUF processes for revocation. Specifically they SHOULD ask the delegator to replace any metadata that includes the compromised OIDC account. If the developer's credentials were compromised, but later recovered, the developer may still use these credentials, but any metadata files that were created while the credentials were compromised should be replaced with a higher version of those metadata files so that the compromised files will not be downloaded (using the existing snapshot protection).

Reviewer 4: One question with this, and this topic has come up too when thinking about artifact revocation: How does a delegator recognize the difference between a developer whose accounts has been compromised requesting a change of delegation, and an attacker who compromised an account and is requesting a change of delegation to an account they control?

Author: This is a really good question. The easy answer is "a trusted communication channel", but if a developer's email account is compromised it could be challenging to find a con-compromised communication channel. If the attacker starts behaving badly (uploading malware, etc), this could be detected and the identity revoked, but if the attacker is less obvious this would be hard.

I'm going to say this problem is out of scope for this TAP (as it was already a problem before), but we should keep discussing it.

> If the Fulcio server is compromised, it may issue certificates on behalf of any attacker who uses Fulcio to verify their identity. However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any Fulcio server compromise. Additionally, all Fulcio certificates are published to a transparency log, so auditors will notice if the Fulcio server is misbehaving and indicate this to users, for example through the use of [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md) to a threshold of both auditor-signed metadata and developer-signed metadata.

Reviewer 4: > However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any Fulcio server compromise

I'd suggest a slight rephrasing, this reads like the Fulcio CA signing key is offline, which isn't accurate. 

I'd also add to that it's possible to recover by distributing a new Fulcio root through the TUF Sigstore root of trust. (Maybe a meta comment, it's probably worth noting early on that the Fulcio and Rekor verification material is distributed via TUF)

> If the Fulcio server is compromised, it may issue certificates on behalf of any attacker who uses Fulcio to verify their identity. However, the Fulcio server is backed by offline keys that are signed by TUF root keys, and so it is possible to recover from any Fulcio server compromise. Additionally, all Fulcio certificates are published to a transparency log, so auditors will notice if the Fulcio server is misbehaving and indicate this to users, for example through the use of [multi-role delegations](https://github.com/theupdateframework/taps/blob/master/tap3.md) to a threshold of both auditor-signed metadata and developer-signed metadata.

Reviewer 4: It might be worth clarifying they are 2 tlogs - Fulcio has a CT log, and there's also Rekor. It's worth considering either being compromised, and that both can be used for auditing.

> 

Reviewer 4: It also worth considering a compromised identity provider who issues ID tokens with arbitrary/attacker-controlled identities

> If only the transparency log is compromised, the attacker will not be able to do anything without cooperation from the Fulcio server. However, if the attacker compromises both the Fulcio server and the transparency log, they would be able to issue fake Fulcio certificates that also appear valid on the transparency log. If this happens, developers auditing the transparency log would notice the mis-issued certificates, and the Fulcio server and transparency log could both be recovered using offline root keys. Implementations using this TAP SHOULD ensure that there are active auditors watching the transparency log.

Reviewer 4: > If only the transparency log is compromised, the attacker will not be able to do anything without cooperation from the Fulcio server

Suggest rephrasing to mention that this is because an attacker can't fetch a valid identity-bound certificate without a compromised Fulcio instance.

> If only the transparency log is compromised, the attacker will not be able to do anything without cooperation from the Fulcio server. However, if the attacker compromises both the Fulcio server and the transparency log, they would be able to issue fake Fulcio certificates that also appear valid on the transparency log. If this happens, developers auditing the transparency log would notice the mis-issued certificates, and the Fulcio server and transparency log could both be recovered using offline root keys. Implementations using this TAP SHOULD ensure that there are active auditors watching the transparency log.

Reviewer 4: > recovered

nit: Not really recovered, I think of that more for availability. It's that we can regenerate the key material and securely distribute it.

In this TAP, we instead propose use of the sigstore project. Sigstore has a growing number of adoptions, and provides a simple mechanism for developers to verify their identity using short-lived keys and ad-hoc certificates issued on the basis of OIDC. Sigstore provides a few services, including [Fulcio](https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio) (a CA) and [Rekor](https://github.com/sigstore/rekor) (a transparency log). With sigstore, long-term efforts to keep private keys secure are not necessary, as signing keys are ephemeral and only used for a single signing event. Fulcio certificates and client generated signatures are published to a timestamped transparency log managed by Rekor so that verifiers can ensure that the certificates were valid at the time of the signature.

# Specification

> In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to any OIDC identity, including developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace public keys for developers (such as ed25519 keys) in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing keys and uses certificates to bind these keys to an identity backed by OIDC authentication. Because the ephemeral keys listed in the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting signing keys in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

Reviewer 5: offline verification of even the timestamp is possible but I suppose that would require including the Signed Entry Timestamp in the signature as well (I've understood this would be slightly less secure as we then don't confirm the entry is part of the rekor log, only that it has been signed by correct rekor keys).

I'd still be interested in hearing why the timestamp checks are absolutely necessary here -- TUF doesn't do any of that for other signatures either -- I'm wondering what sort of new attacks are enabled by (optionally) not checking the validity time.

> In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to any OIDC identity, including developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace public keys for developers (such as ed25519 keys) in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing keys and uses certificates to bind these keys to an identity backed by OIDC authentication. Because the ephemeral keys listed in the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting signing keys in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

Reviewer 6: Yes: would require distributing the Signed Entry Timestamp (similar to SCT) to the verifiers. It could be alongside the signature, not necessarily in the metadata. 

> slightly less secure as we then don't confirm the entry is part of the rekor log

Yes! You don't get log inclusion from this; so you don't get the portion of "is this part of everyones global view", and "did rekor actually store this entry in the log"? 

one thing to note is that the timestamp is NOT part of the log entry, so it's not part of the immutable content of the log. rekor just stores the integrated time of an entry into the backing database (unsigned in the db, so log operators can tamper with it). "the timestamped Rekor transparency log" is a little misnomer because right now (although we're working on it!) it doesn't provide independently verifiable timestamps.

> In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to any OIDC identity, including developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace public keys for developers (such as ed25519 keys) in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing keys and uses certificates to bind these keys to an identity backed by OIDC authentication. Because the ephemeral keys listed in the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting signing keys in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

Reviewer 7: > I'd still be interested in hearing why the timestamp checks are absolutely necessary here -- TUF doesn't do any of that for other signatures either -- I'm wondering what sort of new attacks are enabled by (optionally) not checking the validity time.

The certificate in Sigstore is only valid for ~10 minutes, so you want to check that the signature was made during the validity period. Everything else in TUF needs to be unexpired at the time of verification. 

This mitigates the damage you can do with a weak/leaked Sigstore ephemeral key.

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an OIDC identity, such as an email address, and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. To do so, this TAP adds a “sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  “keytype”: “sigstore-oidc",
  “scheme”: "Fulcio",
  “keyval”: {
    “identity”: IDENTITY,
    “issuer”: ISSUER,
    "root-cert": ROOT_CERTIFICATE
  }
}
```

Where IDENTITY is the OIDC identity of the party who is authorized to sign, ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification, and ROOT_CERTIFICATE is the root certificate or certificate chain for this Fulcio server.

> Using this mechanism, the developer requests a certificate from Fulcio, Fulcio verifies the developer's identity using OIDC, the developer uses the signing key listed in the certificate to sign their targets metadata, and finally the developer uploads the signed metadata. This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by the repository and MAY be verified by the end user by verifying the certificate through Fulcio and the timestamp through Rekor. The verifier MUST obtain the Rekor root keys using a secure offline method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

Reviewer 8: I don't really get how one delegates to someone in this case.  I assume you are delegating to an OIDC identity / issuer / root tuple, but it seems like a common use case will be that people add / remove OIDC identities and primarily the repository is aware of this.  So, in this case, it feels like you need something like TAP 8 key self rotation to forward your delegations to your new set of identities.

For example, if Marina delegates to (justin@example.com, google.com, ...) and then I add (justin@example.com, facebook.com, ...), I don't understand how her delegation will work.  

Actually, I've just realized I don't fully understand if me having two OIDC identities in this case works well at all.  It seems like there would need to be a delegation from one to set of them to handle this.  But even in the case where I know I want to allow both, how do I do this so that I don't store keys for either, yet can revoke trust for either one without delegations, etc. breaking?  

TAP 8 would address this in many ways, but I feel like I'm still not seeing the complete picture clearly.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key MUST include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a ‘cert’ field to ‘signatures’. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
"signatures" : [
    { "keyid" : KEYID,
      "sig" : SIGNATURE,
      “cert”:  CERTIFICATE }
      , ... ]
```
Where CERTIFICATE is a Fulcio X.509 signing certificate in PEM format. CERTIFICATE MUST be uploaded to a timestamped transparency log upon creation.

## Signing
In order to sign metadata using Fulcio, a developer would:
* Generate a key pair locally
* Initiate an OIDC session to obtain a signed identity token containing an identity such as an email from an OIDC provider
* Perform a challenge by signing the subjest of the identity token with the public key
* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a Certificate Transparency log

> * Use the generated private key to sign targets metadata, then include the certificate in ‘signatures’ as indicated above

Reviewer 5: this is all true... but this is handled by sigstore client: I don't think we need to define it here (we don't document the RSA signing in detail either)

* Upload the metadata to the repository
* Upload the certificate to the timestamped Fulcio transparency log.

The repository would automatically perform verification (see below) with Fulcio and the transparency log to ensure that the certificate is current and valid. If the signature is uploaded to the repository during the validity window of the Fulcio certificate, the repository MAY skip the Rekor timestamp verification.

Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers and minimise the risk of human errors.

## Verification
While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST verify the certificate chain up to ROOT_CERTIFICATE.

> In addition, the repository SHOULD, and clients MAY additionally query the Rekor transparency log to ensure that the Fulcio certificate is valid at the time that it was issued. To do so the user can directly query the transparency log for the Fulcio certificate. They can then verify that the certificate was uploaded to Rekor, and use the timestamp in Rekor to verify that the key was valid at the time it was used to sign TUF metadata. The repository SHOULD skip this step if the Fulcio certificate was valid at the time it was uploaded to the repository. Clients MAY skip this step if they would like to rely on the repository to perform the timeliness check. If the client skips this check and the repository is compromised, an attacker could allow the use of expired Fulcio certificates.

Reviewer 4: Just was thinking more about this recently. 

Rekor provides two things - the ability to audit an identity is public, and a time of inclusion to verify expired certificates.

We should separate these two. The former should remain optional if Rekor is involved. It is ideal to make sure users are receiving the same set of keys as others, but I recognize that we want to avoid requiring Rekor. I think i did mention in another comment that all certs are written to the fulcio certificate transparency log, so possibly we could make checking either inclusion or an SCT a requirement? (Note SCTs are included in the certificates, so checking these should be trivial)

I think we need to mandate checking expiration however. This can come in three forms:
* Rekor proof
* A Rekor SET for offline checks 
* A signed timestamp

The last bullet point is what we’ve thinking more about recently. Time stamps could be RFC3161 for example. Sigstore is planning to operate a time stamp authority, or users could fetch a time stamp from a third party time stamp authority like Digicert.

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an OIDC identity, such as an email address, and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. To do so, this TAP adds a “sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  “keytype”: “sigstore-oidc",
  “scheme”: "Fulcio",
  “keyval”: {
    “identity”: IDENTITY,
    “issuer”: ISSUER
  }
}
```

Where IDENTITY is the OIDC identity of the party who is authorized to sign and ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification.

> The root certificate or certificate chain for the Fulcio server MUST be obtained using the Sigstore root of trust.

Reviewer 6: how can a user differentiate between custom sigstore roots, like the staging or prod instances in order to get the right trusted material for Fulcio? the user definitely needs to be communicated what its trust roots are out of band, but as a hint, maybe something in the keyval can reference the root.. like the root certificate issuer?
```
"root-issuer": "Sigstore Staging"
```

Reviewer 7: I just sent you a doc (for drive-by observers: if it's not available publicly by Nov 7 2022, annoy me here!) but tl;dr:

- For this TAP, we're assuming one Sigstore instance that's agreed upon by clients/repos. This isn't terribly satisfying but probably works most of the time.
- I think you're right about sticking something in the key (or maybe changing the scheme) in the medium term.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key MUST include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a ‘bundle’ field to ‘signatures’ to replace `sig` for this key type. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
"signatures" : [
    { "keyid" : KEYID,
      “bundle”:  BUNDLE }
      , ... ]
```

> Where BUNDLE is an object that contains the transparency log verification information, Fulcio X.509 signing certificate, and a signature over targets metadata, conforming to the [format defined by Sigstore](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/main/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto). The transparency log verification information includes a signed timestamp (SET) from Rekor promising inclusion in the Rekor transparency log.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Where BUNDLE is an object that contains the verification information (transparency log references or timestamps), Fulcio X.509 signing certificate, and a signature over targets metadata, conforming to the [format defined by Sigstore](https://github.com/sigstore/protobuf-specs/blob/main/protos/sigstore_bundle.proto). The transparency log verification information includes a signed timestamp (SET) from Rekor promising inclusion in the Rekor transparency log.
```

## Signing
In order to sign metadata using Fulcio, a developer MUST:

* Initiate an OIDC session to obtain an identity token signed by the OIDC identity provider's public key containing the developer's IDENTITY.
* Generate a key pair locally.
* Create a certificate signing request containing the subject of the identity token. Sign this certificate with the generated private key.
* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio by sending the certificate signing request along with the identity token.
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a Certificate Transparency log.
* Use the generated private key to create signature over targets metadata.

> * Upload the certificate, signature, and hash of the targets metadata to the timestamped Rekor transparency log. Rekor will return an SET with a timestampe that indicates that Rekor recieved the request and will include it in the log.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Upload the certificate, signature, and hash of the targets metadata to the timestamped Rekor transparency log. Rekor will return an SET with a timestamp that indicates that Rekor received the request and will include it in the log.
```

* Create a bundle that contains the signature, Fulcio certificate, SET.
* Upload the metadata, including the bundle to the repository.

Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool, to simplify operations for developers and minimise the risk of human errors.

## Verification

> This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by the repository and MAY be verified by the end user. The verifier MUST obtain the Rekor root keys using a secure offline method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

Reviewer 6: > obtain the Rekor root keys using a secure offline method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

If they obtain it via TUF does that count as offline? The initial root is offline :)

Reviewer 7: Yeah, "out of band" might be better here

Author: Yeah, in the case of the Sigstore instance this means "do TUF verification". I'll use "out of band" to make this more clear.

While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST perform the verification. In addition, the repository MUST perform verifcation.

Verification includes the following steps:

> * Verify the signature on the certificate to ensure that the signature chains up to the trusted Fulcio root.

Reviewer 6: Optionally (or maybe not @haydentherapper ) verify the certificate's inclusion in the CT log with the trusted certificate log public key (obtained out of band)

Reviewer 4: I think this is a requirement if you are using the public Fulcio instance. You want to know that identity certificates are auditable.

Author: Is this not included in step 3 here? (verify the SET)

Reviewer 4: They're separate logs. What if someone doesn't want to use Rekor? If you don't need public auditability and you only use Rekor for timestamping, once we add in functionality for using other timestamping mechanisms, then Fulcio + signed timestamp is sufficient.

Author: Oh, so this is verify the Fulcio certificate is included in a CT log?

Reviewer 4: Yep exactly! There's an open question of if we really need a CT log in addition to Rekor, but if there will be clients who only care about code signing without auditability, I think it is useful to maintain a separate log just for Fulcio certs.

Author: Got it, adding this step

* Verify the signature on the TUF metadata using the key from the Fulcio certificate.

> * Verify the SET to ensure that the certificate was included in the Rekor transparency log.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Verify the SET to ensure that the signature was signed during certificate validity
```

Verifying a SET does not actually give you the validity that it was included, just a promise. If you did online verification you could verify the inclusion proof.

Reviewer 7: You don't want to block package publication on the merge, though, so you can't wait for Rekor to catch up (you can today because there is no merge delay, but I don't think we should rely on that behavior).

Below it says clients MAY do online verification which I think is the right recommendation. Maybe SHOULD?

Reviewer 6: Oh I agree! I just wanted to clarify the wording: I think SET verification is to validate the signature was creating during the cert validity period. technically, verification doesn't *require* inclusion in the tlog, although that's a nice property to have. but i don't think you can totally get that without online verification

MAY vs SHOULD: SHOULD if their client can wait for the response? otherwise MAY, either or

Reviewer 4: It's an interesting idea to wait for the merge, but I think this can be implemented by the repositories, a periodic check for inclusion in the log. Maybe something like a checkmark (sorry, ive been on twitter too much recently) once it's verified inclusion

Periodically the repository SHOULD perform online verification of all Rekor uses.
Online clients MAY additionally perform online verification. This process is described in the auditors section below.

## Auditors and Monitoring

Online verification requires the following steps:

* Obtain the most recent Rekor signed tree head.
	* Query the Rekor transparancy log for a consistency proof against your current signed tree head.

> 	* Verify this consistency proof.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
	* Verify this consistency proof.
	* Persist the newest signed tree head
```

> * Query the Rekor transparency log for a proof of inclusion against the certificate included in the TUF metadata

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Query the Rekor transparency log for a proof of inclusion against the certificate and TUF metadata
```

You'd need both the certificate and TUF metadata for the query

> * Verify this inclusion proof.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Verify this inclusion proof.
* Verify that the root hash of the inclusion proof is consistent with the signed tree head verified in step 1
```

Reviewer 6: Honestly, I'd remove step 1 in favor of 

```
* Query the Rekor transparency log for a proof of inclusion against the certificate included in the TUF metadata
* Verify this inclusion proof.
* Verify that the root hash of the inclusion proof is consistent with your current signed tree head.
* Persist the signed tree head corresponding to the inclusion proof's root hash.
```

This way you only have to verify consistency once

Author: Establishing the current tree head first allows the verifier to ensure that the head they're using is current and allows them to batch multiple verifications (especially for auditors who will be checking a bunch of different entries at once)

If only one of the transparency logs is compromised, the attacker will not be able to do anything without cooperation from the Fulcio server because the attack will not be able to create a valid certificate without a compromised Fulcio instance. However, if the attacker compromises both the Fulcio server and the transparency log, they would be able to issue fake Fulcio certificates that also appear valid on the transparency log. If this happens, developers auditing the transparency log would notice the mis-issued certificates, and the Fulcio server and transparency log could both securely replace their key material using offline root key from the TUF Sigstore root. Implementations using this TAP SHOULD ensure that there are active auditors watching both the transparency logs.

If the identity provider used for OIDC is compromised, they may issue tokens with attacker controlled identities. Metadata signed by certificates from compromised identity providers can be revoked using the usual TUF process, and the identity providers can be removed from the delegating TUF metadata.

> By default, clients will perform offline verification. They may choose to additionally perform online verification. In practice, exisiting uses of transparency logs use offline verification as it saves bandwidth and maximum merge delays on the transparency log mean that onlie verification is not immediately available. This is because the transparency log will batch additions to the log. Offline verification relies on a signature from the Rekor key that the entry will be included. This is the same key that signs the Rekor signed tree head in online verification. If the Rekor key is compromised, both of these verification types could be tricked. However, monitors are able to detect bad behavior once entries are added to the log, and monitor signatures can be used to provide additional assurance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
By default, clients will perform offline verification. They may choose to additionally perform online verification. In practice, exisiting uses of transparency logs use offline verification as it saves bandwidth and maximum merge delays on the transparency log mean that onlie verification is not immediately available. This is because the transparency log will batch additions to the log. Offline verification relies on a signature from the Rekor key that the entry will be included and that the entry was seen at a certain time. This is the same key that signs the Rekor signed tree head in online verification. If the Rekor key is compromised, both of these verification types could be tricked. However, monitors are able to detect bad behavior once entries are added to the log, and monitor signatures can be used to provide additional assurance.
```

* TAP:
* Title: Ephemeral identity verification using sigstore's Fulcio for TUF developer key management
* Version: 0

> * Last-Modified: 27/07/2021

Reviewer 9: Nit: this date is a long time in the past, should we update?

Author: Addressed in #168

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an OIDC identity, such as an email address, and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. To do so, this TAP adds a "sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  "keytype": "sigstore-oidc",
  "scheme": "Fulcio",
  "keyval": {
    "identity": IDENTITY,
    "issuer": ISSUER
  }
}
```

> Where IDENTITY is the OIDC identity of the party who is authorized to sign and ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification.

Reviewer 9: Nit: examples of IDENTITY and ISSUER would be nice. Can we include an example?

> The root certificate or certificate chain for the Fulcio server MUST be obtained using the Sigstore root of trust. The client MUST use a single Fulcio instance.

Reviewer 9: Nit: is it worth linking to https://github.com/sigstore/root-signing ? I wish we had a better client-facing doc for the Sigstore root of trust repo.

Reviewer 7: +1 to describing the root of trust better.

Also, this TAP at the moment is tied strongly to the single "public good" Sigstore instance. I think in practice that should be specified by the TUF repository---you want all clients to agree on the CA infrastructure to use!

For a draft this is probably fine.

Author: Added in #168, with a followup in #169 to link to any new Sigstore documentation.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key MUST include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a 'bundle' field to 'signatures' to replace `sig` for this key type. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
{
   "keyid" : KEYID,
   "bundle": BUNDLE
 }

> ```

Reviewer 9: An example would be nice here, too.

Reviewer 5: Yes! Not seeing examples makes it really hard to evaluate the complete design (when reviewers need to paint the big picture in their heads). I can understand if you don't want to add them in the TAP, but they should exist somewhere.

Author: Documented in #169

## Signing
In order to sign metadata using Fulcio, a signer MUST:

* Initiate an OIDC session to obtain an identity token signed by the OIDC identity provider's public key containing the signer's IDENTITY.
* Generate a key pair locally.
* Create a certificate signing request containing the subject of the identity token. Sign this certificate with the generated private key.
* Request a short-lived certificate from Fulcio by sending the certificate signing request along with the identity token.
   * Fulcio will upload the certificate to a Certificate Transparency log.
* Use the generated private key to create signature over targets metadata.
* Upload the certificate, signature, and hash of the targets metadata to the timestamped Rekor transparency log. Rekor will return an SET with a timestamp that indicates that Rekor received the request and will include it in the log.

> * Create a bundle that contains the signature, Fulcio certificate, SET.

Reviewer 9: Nit: if this is the standard Sigstore signing workflow, can we just link to some Sigstore reference material?

Reviewer 5: Agreed. A lot of different signing mechanisms have implementation details that the tuf spec does not cover -- like Yubikeys can have pin/touch policies, KMSs have unique ways of key creation etc. Why do we do this for sigstore?

Author: Documented in #169

## Verification
This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by a centralized authority and MAY be verified by the end user. This centralized authority MAY be a repository, or MAY be a separate service. The verifier MUST obtain the Rekor root keys and the certificate log public key using a secure out of band method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST perform the offline verification. In addition, a centralized entity (such as the repository) MUST perform offline verification.

Offline verification includes the following steps:

* Verify the signature on the certificate to ensure that the signature chains up to the trusted Fulcio root.
* Verify the Fulcio certificate's bundled CT inclusion proof with the trusted certificate log public key.
* Verify the signature on the TUF metadata using the key from the Fulcio certificate.

> * Verify the SET to ensure that the signature was signed during certificate validity.

Reviewer 9: Nit: if this is the standard Sigstore verification workflow, can we just link to some Sigstore reference material?

Reviewer 7: The best reference material is still a draft (client specification).

Perhaps we inline it for now with a plan to replace this later on

Author: Documented in #169

By default, clients will perform offline verification. They may choose to additionally perform online verification. In practice, existing uses of transparency logs use offline verification as it saves bandwidth and maximum merge delays on the transparency log mean that online verification is not immediately available. This is because the transparency log will batch additions to the log. Offline verification relies on a signature from the Rekor key that the entry will be included and that the entry was seen at a certain time. This is the same key that signs the Rekor signed tree head in online verification. If the Rekor key is compromised, both of these verification types could be tricked. However, monitors are able to detect bad behavior once entries are added to the log, and monitor signatures can be used to provide additional assurance.

# Backwards Compatibility

Clients that do not recognize Fulcio certs will not be able to validate signatures from Fulcio certs, but they will be able to parse the metadata.

> As `sig` was removed from `signatures`, parsing of the signatures will fail for old clients.

Reviewer 5: Drafts don't need to be perfect so this isn't a show stopper... But did you consider leaving the sig in there?

I understand it's removed because it's likely in the bundle already. But if the sig was left in there, then older clients would be able to handle the metadata file properly -- the data just wouldn't be signed be enough keys (because the signature by an unsupported keytype could not be verified). If the sig is not there, then clients  will be unable to load the metadata at all, because the metadata is clearly incompatible with older spec versions.

I'm not sure there is a practical use case for this but it just feels like adding new key (and signature) schemes shouldn't be breaking changes if they don't have to be.

Reviewer 7: IMO we could just stuff the bundle into the existing `signature` field. Should be more backwards compatible; I agree with the general sentiment.

Author: added in #168

# Specification
In addition to supporting existing TUF targets delegations, this TAP adds support for delegations to any OIDC identity, including developer email addresses, to be verified by Fulcio. These delegations MAY replace public keys for developers (such as ed25519 keys) in order to simplify their key management. Fulcio generates short-lived signing keys and uses certificates to bind these keys to an identity backed by OIDC authentication. Because the ephemeral keys listed in the certificates are short-lived, the developer will not be responsible for protecting signing keys in the long term and in practice SHOULD discard them immediately after signing. Fulcio certificates are automatically uploaded to the timestamped Rekor transparency log, so repositories and clients can verify that the certificate was valid at the time of signing.

## Delegation format
In order to facilitate use of Fulcio, delegations may list an OIDC identity, such as an email address, and location of a Fulcio server instead of a public key. To do so, this TAP adds a “sigstore-oidc" keytype for a KEY with the following format:

```
{
  “keytype”: “sigstore-oidc",

>   “scheme”: "Fulcio",

Author: It's possible that a different Fulcio instance could be used, which could be specified as a different scheme so that the correct CT log, etc are checked.

  “keyval”: {
    “identity”: IDENTITY,
    “issuer”: ISSUER
  }
}
```

Where IDENTITY is the OIDC identity of the party who is authorized to sign and ISSUER is the OIDC entity used by Fulcio for verification.

The root certificate or certificate chain for the Fulcio server MUST be obtained using the Sigstore root of trust. The client MUST use a single Fulcio instance.

## Signature format
A signature using a Fulcio key MUST include the Fulcio certificate for use in verification. For this verification, this TAP adds a ‘bundle’ field to ‘signatures’ to replace `sig` for this key type. With this field, signatures would look like:

```
"signatures" : [
    { "keyid" : KEYID,
      “bundle”:  BUNDLE }

>       , ... ]

Author: I linked to the Sigstore BUNDLE definition. I avoided repeating it here as I think that definition should be the source of truth (and will remain up to date)

>    "bundle":  BUNDLE

Reviewer 10: Nit
```suggestion
   "bundle": BUNDLE
```

Most of these steps SHOULD be done automatically using a tool (such as Sigstore), to simplify operations for signers and minimise the risk of human errors. After the
signature is created, the TUF metadata SHOULD be uploaded as ususal.

## Verification
This signature, and the associated Rekor timestamp obtained by querying the Rekor server, MUST be verified by a centralized authority and MAY be verified by the end user. This centralized authority MAY be a repository, or MAY be a separate service. The verifier MUST obtain the Rekor root keys and the certificate log public key using a secure out of band method prior to verifying the signature and associated certificate.

While performing the steps in the [TUF client workflow](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/latest/#detailed-client-workflow), if the client encounters a signature that uses a Fulcio certificate, the client MUST perform the offline verification. In addition, a centralized entity (such as the repository) MUST perform offline verification.

Offline verification includes the following steps:

* Verify the signature on the certificate to ensure that the signature chains up to the trusted Fulcio root.

> * Verify the Fulcio certificate's inclusion in the CT log with the trusted certificate log public key.

Reviewer 10: Don't we need to be online to actually verify the inclusion in the CT log?

Author: Technically this is a verifying a promise of inclusion, which is included in the bundle. I'll fix that.

Similar to signing, this verification SHOULD be done with existing Sigstore tooling.
Periodically the centralized authority SHOULD perform online verification (described below) of all Rekor uses.
Online clients MAY additionally perform online verification. Offline clients rely on the centralized authority for all online checks. Online verification is described in the auditors section below.

## Auditors and Monitoring

Online verification requires the following steps:

1. Obtain the most recent Rekor signed tree head.
	* Query the Rekor transparency log for a consistency proof against your current signed tree head.
	* Verify this consistency proof.
	* Persist the newest signed tree head.
1. Query the Rekor transparency log for a proof of inclusion against the certificate and TUF metadata.
1. Verify this inclusion proof.
1. Verify that the root hash of the inclusion proof is consistent with the signed tree head verified in step 1.

Online verification SHOULD be performed periodically by a centralized entity with the ability to remove compromised metadata from the repository and MAY be performed by clients.

> Signers SHOULD monitor the transparency log (TL)  and look for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the signer SHOULD replace any compromised metadata (creating new Fulcio certificate), and ensure the security of their OIDC account. If the OIDC account cannot be recovered, the signer MUST contact the role that delegates to them to replace the delegation to their OIDC identity.

Reviewer 10: Nit:
```suggestion
Signers SHOULD monitor the transparency log (TL) and look for certificates associated with their OIDC accounts to look for unauthorized activity. If they see a certificate on the TL that they did not issue, the signer SHOULD replace any compromised metadata (creating new Fulcio certificate), and ensure the security of their OIDC account. If the OIDC account cannot be recovered, the signer MUST contact the role that delegates to them to replace the delegation to their OIDC identity.
```
